CHAPTER VII.
For this Melchizedek, king of Salem, priest of the Most High God, who met Abraham,
returning from the slaughter of the kings, and blessed him, to whom also Abraham gave a tenth
part of all, first being by interpretation king of righteousness, and after that also king of Salem,
which is king of peace, without father, without mother, without descent, having neither beginning
of days nor end of life, but made like unto the Son of God, abideth a priest continually.
Now consider how great this man was, unto whom even the patriarch Abraham gave the tenth of the
And verily, they that are of the sons of Levi, who receive the office of the priesthood, have a
commandment, to take tithes of the people according to the law, that is, of their brethren, though they
come out of the loins of Abraham, but he whose descent is not counted from them, received tithes
of Abraham, and blessed him that had the promises, and without all contradiction, the less is blessed
of the better. And here men that die receive tithes, but there he receiveth them, of whom it is
that he liveth, and as I may so say, Levi also who receiveth tithes, paid tithes in Abraham, for he was
yet in the loins of his father when Melchizedek met him. If therefore perfection were by the
Levitical priesthood, for under it the people received the law, what further need was there that
another priest should rise after the order of Melchizedek, and not be called after the order of Aaron?
For the priesthood being changed, there is made of necessity a change also of the law, for he of whom these
things are spoken pertaineth to another tribe, of which no man gave attendance at the altar, for it is
evident that our Lord sprang out of Judah, of which tribe Moses spake nothing concerning priesthood.
And it is yet far more evident, for that after the similitude of Melchizedek, there ariseth another priest,
who is made not after the law of a carnal commandment, but after the power of an endless life.
For he testifieth, thou art a priest forever after the order of Melchizedek, for there is verily a
disannulling of the commandment going before, for the weakness and unprofitableness thereof,
for the law made nothing perfect, but the bringing in of a better hope did by the
law, which we draw nigh unto God. And inasmuch as not without an oath, he was made priest, for those
priests were made without an oath, but this with an oath by him that said unto him, The Lord swear
and will not repent, thou art a priest forever after the order of Melchizedek. By so much was
made a surety of a better testament, and they truly were many priests, because they were not
suffered to continue by reason of death. But this man, because he continueth ever, hath an
unchangeable priesthood, wherefore he is able also to save them to the uttermost that come unto God
by him, seeing he ever liveth to make intercession for them. For such an high priest became us,
who is holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners, and made higher than the heavens,
who needeth not daily as those high priests to offer up sacrifice, first for his own sins,
and then for the people's. For this he did once, when he offered up himself. For the law maketh
men high priests which have infirmity, but the word of the oath which was since the law maketh
the son who is consecrated forevermore. Chapter 8. Now, of the things which we have spoken,
this is the sum. We have such an high priest, who is set on the right hand of the throne of
the majesty in the heavens, a minister of the sanctuary, and of the true tabernacle which the
Lord pitched, and not man. For every high priest is ordained to offer gifts and sacrifices, wherefore
it is of necessity that this man have somewhat also to offer. For if he were on earth, he should
not be a priest, seeing that there are priests that offer gifts according to the law, who serve
unto the example and shadow of heavenly things, as Moses was admonished of God when he was about
to make the tabernacle. For see, saith he, that thou make all things according to the pattern
shewed to thee in the mount. But now hath he obtained a more excellent ministry, by how much
also he is the mediator of a better covenant, which was established upon better promises. For
if that first covenant had been faultless, then should no place have been sought for the second.
For finding fault with them, he said, Behold, the days come, saith the Lord, when I will make
a new covenant with the house of Israel, and with the house of Judah. Not according to the covenant
that I made with their fathers, in the day when I took them by the hand to lead them out of the land
of Egypt, because they continued not in my covenant, and I regarded them not, saith the Lord. For this is
the covenant that I will make with the house of Israel, after those days, saith the Lord. I will
put my laws into their mind, and write them in their hearts, and I will be to them a God, and they
shall be to me a people. And they shall not teach every man his neighbor, and every man his brother,
saying, Know the Lord, for all shall know me, from the least to the greatest. For I will be merciful
to their unrighteousness, and their sins and their iniquities will I remember no more. In that he
covenant he hath made the first old, now that which decayeth and waxeth old is ready to vanish away.
Chapter 9. Then verily, the first covenant had also ordinances of divine service, and a worldly
sanctuary. For there was a tabernacle made, the first wherein was the candlestick, and the table,
and the showbread, which is called the sanctuary. And after the second veil, the tabernacle,
which is called the holiest of all, which had the golden censer, and the ark of the covenant,
overlaid round about with gold, wherein was the golden pot that had manna, and Aaron's rod that
it, and the tables of the covenant. And over it the cherubims of glory, shadowing the mercy seat
of which we cannot now speak particularly. Now, when these things were thus ordained,
the priest went always into the first tabernacle, accomplishing the service of God. But into the
second went the high priest alone, once every year, not without blood, which he offered for
himself, and for the errors of the people. The Holy Ghost this signifying that the way into the
holiest of all was not yet made manifest, while as the first tabernacle was yet standing. Which was
a figure for the time then present, in which were offered both gifts and sacrifices, that could not
make him that did the service perfect. As pertaining to the conscience, which stood only in meats and
drinks and divers washings, and carnal ordinances imposed on them until the time of reformation.
But Christ, being come in high priest of good things to come, by a greater and more perfect
tabernacle, not made with hands, that is to say, not of this building, neither by the blood of goats
and calves, but by his own blood, he entered in once into the Holy Place, having obtained
eternal redemption for us. For if the blood of bulls and of goats, and the ashes of in heifer
sprinkling the unclean sanctified to the purifying of the flesh, how much more shall the blood of
Christ, who through the eternal spirit offered himself without spot to God, purge your conscience
from dead works to serve the living God. And for this cause, he is the mediator of the New Testament,
that by means of death, for the redemption of the transgressions that were under the first
testament, they which are called might receive the promise of eternal inheritance. For where a
death of the testator, for a testament is a force after men are dead, otherwise it is of no strength,
at all, while the testator liveth, whereupon neither the first testament was dedicated with
our blood. For when Moses had spoken every precept to all the people, according to the law, he took
the blood of calves and of goats with water and scarlet wool and hyssop, and sprinkled both the book
and all the people, saying, This is the blood of the testament which God hath enjoined unto you.
Moreover, he sprinkled with blood both the tabernacle and all the vessels of the ministry,
and almost all things are by the law purged with blood, and without shedding of blood
there is no remission. It was therefore necessary that the patterns of things in the heavens should
be purified with these, but the heavenly things themselves with better sacrifices than these.
For Christ is not entered into the holy places made with hands, which are the figures of the true,
but into heaven itself now to appear in the presence of God for us. Nor yet that he should
offer himself often, as the high priest entereth into the holy place every year with blood of
others. For then must he often have suffered since the foundation of the world, but now once
in the end of the world hath he appeared to put away sin by the sacrifice of himself.
And as it is appointed unto men once to die, but after this the judgment. So Christ was once offered
to bear the sins of many, and unto them that look for him shall he appear the second time without
sin unto salvation. End of chapters seven through nine. Recording by Simon Wainwright.